
Kevin Gates -  Rx Flow









Kevin Gates
























Kevin Gates



Case Studies

          Projects / Writing
        

          Ask My AI
        









        Traversing Patient Journeys
      

I created this prototype over the course of a few days when I was a data vizualization engineer at Practice Fusion. The head of the medical informatics ask me to experiment with how pharma analysts might explore patient journeys for a diabetes drug called Invokana. 
        

        The goal was to have a way for users to see a logitudinal view of what drug regimines Invokana patients have been prescribed, and where else in the jouney the drug might be benficial to them. 
        

Starting with the big picture

        The initial state enables users to explore patient journeys starting with all patients prescribed Invokana. They then work backwards, opening branches. Each branch leads to more patients, which are grouped by drug regimines.
      



Pharma analysts can explore patient cohort journeys of drug prescriptions.
Selecting patient groups

        Once the user finds a group of patient cohorts they are interested in, they can select them and see a detailed dashboard.
      

        At the time I created this, I had read a paper by Jeffrey Heer and George Robertson, Animated Transitions in Statistical Data Graphics, and was inspired their findings around object tracking. In my implementation, users find the patient groups they want to inspect, select them, and the colored circles representing patient groups move to a new context.
      



Selecting a group of patient groups transitions to a detailed dashboard
Exploring Cohort Details

        The top columns are key patient attributes, the rows are patient cohorts grouped by drug regimine. Columns can be sorted. This is key: One of the rows is called "All Diabetics", a benchmark against which the others can be compared. Invokana patients should be younger and sicker than average, which shows up in the data.
      




        Thoughts on the Prototype
      

        If I were to explore this concept further, I thought it might be interesting to allow users to choose a starting point and an end point. In other words, users could start with a diagnosis of high blood pressure and end with Invokana. The UI might somehow show all paths between these points and give user to ability to filter and explore until they want a detailed dashboard.  
      

        Anyway, go ahead and try the prototype yourself!
      




menu




chevron_left

Case Studies

HealthWatch

Role and Team
Roadmapping
Research
Strategy
Collaboration
Rapid prototyping
Logic design
Dog fooding
Conclusion

Knative

Role and Team
Strategy
Design Strategy
Story Mapping
Competitive Analysis
Ideation
Rapid Prototyping
Wireframing
Alpha Release
Conclusion

Dev Console

Role and Team
Roadmapping
Research
Personas
Workshop Prep
Problem Prioritization
Causal Mapping
Solutioning
Product Vision
Storyboard
Conclusion

Obama

How it works
Role and Team
Concepting
Wireframing
People
Pivot
Development
Conclusion







            © Copyright 2023 by Kevin Gates.
          

kgates@gmail.com
LinkedIn





