
Kevin Gates -  Weather









Kevin Gates
























Kevin Gates



Case Studies

          Projects / Writing
        

          Ask My AI
        










          Exploration: How Might Users Interact With a Large Data Set On a Phone?
        

Have you ever flown to a new city—maybe Chicago or Stolkholm— and wondered how cold it might be when you need to walk to work in the morning? Forecasts are one thing, but they are not reliable, especially if they are more than a few days in the future. How might you be able to know what locals in Chicago or Stolkholm know intuitively?
           



           Weather Forecasts with Historical Context
        

          Say a user wants to know the temperature in New York City when they plan to walk to work—8 AM on November 4th. Imagine they could see what the weather tends to be like at that time based on 40 years of historical data. 
        





Users can view historic weather data.



               To do this, 8 AM temperatures for New York City on November 1st through November 7th would be collected (280 measurements), then percentiles would be calculated. The user could then see historics by dragging down on the chart.
            

               This effectively answers two key questions forecasts do not: 1) How cold does it tend to be in Chicago at 8 am in early November?, and 2) How cold can it get?
            



          Appendix: Applying Design Principles
        

          As a designer, I've always liked the idea of getting designs translated into code quickly. React's concept of components and state made certain design principles relatively easy to implement, such as allowing users to recover from mistakes (a.k.a., "undo"). I also liked designing directly in code using FlexBox / CSS and skipping superfluous visual design steps. Below are a couple examples.
        








Controls are near the things they affect





Settings let users decide what's important





Undo lets users recover from mistakes





menu




chevron_left

Case Studies

HealthWatch

Role and Team
Roadmapping
Research
Strategy
Collaboration
Rapid prototyping
Logic design
Dog fooding
Conclusion

Knative

Role and Team
Strategy
Design Strategy
Story Mapping
Competitive Analysis
Ideation
Rapid Prototyping
Wireframing
Alpha Release
Conclusion

Dev Console

Role and Team
Roadmapping
Research
Personas
Workshop Prep
Problem Prioritization
Causal Mapping
Solutioning
Product Vision
Storyboard
Conclusion

Obama

How it works
Role and Team
Concepting
Wireframing
People
Pivot
Development
Conclusion







            © Copyright 2023 by Kevin Gates.
          

kgates@gmail.com
LinkedIn





